Using Imbalanced-Learn to handle imbalanced text data in Natural Language Processing (#7342)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/index.md

 
In natural language processing (NLP), we have various libraries that can handle text data that have an imbalance. We will use the [Imbalanced-learn](https://imbalanced-learn.org/stable/) library. Imbalanced-learn will balance the classes in the dataset. It will also reduce model bias and enhance the NLP performance.

We will first build a spam classifier model with natural language processing without balancing the classes in the dataset. We will implement the same model but use Imbalanced-Learn to balance the classes. Finally, we will compare the two models (before and after balancing) and evaluate their performance.

### Table of contents
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Spam classification dataset](#spam-classification-dataset)
- [Renaming the dataset column](#renaming-the-dataset-column)
- [Calculating the length of each data sample](#calculating-the-length-of-each-data-sample)
- [Text cleaning](#text-cleaning)
- [Installing NLTK](#installing-nltk)
- [Creating the custom functions](#creating-the-custom-functions)

> - [Converting the class labels into integer values](#converting-the-class-labels-into-interger-values)

Reviewer: Fix this heading. It is not rendering.

- [Implementing text vectorization](#implementing-text-vectorization)
- [Splitting the vectorized dataset](#splitting-the-vectorized-dataset)
- [Model building](#model-building)
- [Making predictions using the test set](#making-predictions-using-the-test-set)
- [Getting accuracy score of these predictions](#getting-accuracy-score-of-these-predictions)
- [Implementing Imbalanced-learn](#implementing-imbalanced-learn)
- [Splitting the text dataset](#splitting-the-text-dataset)
- [Applying `RandomOverSampler` function](#applying-randomoversampler-function)
- [Using the balanced dataset to build the same model](#using-the-balanced-dataset-to-build-the-same-model)
- [Predicting using the model](#predicting-using-the-model)
- [Getting accuracy score](#getting-accuracy-score)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [References](#references)

### Prerequisites

> Ensure you know the following concepts to follow along easily and understand the tutorial:
> 
> - Know [Python Programming] (https://www.w3schools.com/python/) concepts.
> - Know natural language concepts and how to [implemment an NLP model](/engineering-education/building-autocorrect-feature-using-nlp-with-python/).
> - Understand [machine learning modelling] (/engineering-education/house-price-prediction/) and other related concepts.
> - Implement the spam classification model in [Google Colab](https://research.google.com/colaboratory/) to get the same results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow along easily and understand the tutorial, ensure you know the following concepts:
- [Python Programming](https://www.w3schools.com/python/) concepts.
- Natural language concepts and how to [implement an NLP model](/engineering-education/building-autocorrect-feature-using-nlp-with-python/).
- Understand [machine learning modelling](/engineering-education/house-price-prediction/) and other related concepts.
- Implement the spam classification model in [Google Colab](https://research.google.com/colaboratory/) to get the same results.
```

### Spam classification dataset
We will use the SMS collection dataset to train the NLP model. It has two labeled classes. (`spam` and `ham`). 

The `spam` class contains all the spam SMS. The `ham` class has all the SMS that are not spam. 

> The NLP model will classify an SMS as either spam or not spam. Ensure you can download the SMS collection dataset from [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1OLdz-fSUBEARnMqUdrTW4bkmGy8yUpCE/view?usp=sharing).

Reviewer: As a rule of thumb, ensure that your paragraphs are at least three lines long before adding spaces. Fix this issue throughout your tutorial

Let's also check for null values as follows:

```python
df.isnull().sum()
```
It gives this output:

![Check for null values](/engineering-education/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/null-values.png)

The dataset has no null values. We get the value count of each class to know whether the dataset has a class imbalance.

```python
df['label'].value_counts()
```
It gives the following output:

![Data sample count](/engineering-education/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/data-samples-count.png)

The output shows the `spam` class has 747 data samples and the `ham` class has 4825 data samples. The `ham` is the majority class, and the `spam` class the minority. Thus, our dataset is imbalanced.

### Calculating the length of each data sample 
We will create a new `length` column that will show the length of each data sample. This new column will help us with preprocessing the data samples.

```python
df['length'] = df['text'].apply(lambda x: len(x))
```
To see the contents of the new `length` column, input this code:

```python
df.head()
```
It gives this output:

> ![New length column](/engineering-education/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/new-length-column.png). We will start cleaning the text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![New length column](/engineering-education/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/new-length-column.png). 

We will begin cleaning the text.
```

### Text cleaning

> Before building the spam classification model, we will clean the dataset to have the required format. Many text cleaning steps will format the text. Some of them are, removing unnecessary words, punctuation, stop words, white spaces, and unnecessary symbols from the text dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before building the spam classification model, we will clean the dataset to have the required format. Many text cleaning steps will format the text. It includes removing unnecessary words, punctuation, stop words, white spaces, and unnecessary symbols from the text dataset.
```

We will use `TfidfVectorizer` to create the sparse matrix. We import it as follows:

```python
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import TfidfVectorizer
```
We initialize the method as follows:

```python
tf_wb= TfidfVectorizer()
```
We then apply the initialized method to the `text` column so that it can transform the text strings into a sparse matrix.

```python
X_tf = tf_wb.fit_transform(df['text'])
```
### Converting the sparse matrix into an array
We will use NumPy.

```python
import numpy as np
```
We then apply the `toarray` function to convert the sparse matrix into an array.

```python
X_tf = X_tf.toarray()
```
To see the output array, input this code:

```python
print(X_tf)
```
It gives this output:

![Array](/engineering-education/imbalanced-learn-to-handle-imbalanced-text-data-in-natural-language-processing/array.png)

We will feed the array into the model for training. 

### Splitting the vectorized dataset

> We will split the vectorized dataset into two portions/sets. The first portion will be for model training and the 

Reviewer: This sentence seems to be incomplete.

### Making predictions using the test set
We make predictions on the testing set values as follows:

```python
NB_pred= NB.predict(X_test_tf)
print(NB_pred)
```
The model will assign the labels (0 and 1) to the test set and print some of the predictions. The output below shows some of the predictions:

```bash
[0 0 0 ... 0 0 0]
```
### Getting accuracy score of these predictions
We will use the `accuracy_score` method. We import it as follows:

```python
from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
```
We then apply the function and print the accuracy score as follows:

```python
print(accuracy_score(y_test_tf, NB_pred))
```
It prints the following accuracy score:

```bash
0.8762331838565023
```
This accuracy score is `87.623%`. It shows the ratio of the accurately predicted data samples to the total data samples in the testing set. 

We have built the model without class balancing. The next step is to implement the same model but use Imbalanced-learn to balance the classes.

### Implementing Imbalanced-learn
We install the library as follows:

```python
!pip install imbalanced-learn

> ```

Reviewer: This is a `bash` command
